Email from Aziz to Stephane Boucheron Nov 23, 2017

We will start working on the proposal for a workshop at the Fields Institute on RCTs and evidence extraction issues.
We fully agree with your statement: “On one side, theory people assert their work might be useful to practitioners but they don't really care. On the other side, practitioners are very busy and happy with their models and protocols”. It is an accurate assessment of the current situation of RCTs, which leaves a vacuum, a pretty big empty space that lies between the practitioners and the theoreticians. The RCT theoreticians would never openly accept to criticize the RCT methods (they would be shooting themselves in the foot … Right?). And, the practitioners are just fine to keep conducting their applied research using RCTs, while feeling protected by the slogan “RCTs are the gold standard”. In the meantime, tons of drugs and interventions are being approved by the FDA (and other regulatory bodies around the world) for the entire population, when they should have actually been approved for only one segment of the population. The ones who end up suffering from this situation are, us, the patients, and the institutions who pay for healthcare services.
However, the good thing about all of this is that the funding agencies (at least here in Canada) are now aware of the challenge posed by the evaluation of interventions (please see the attached Discussion Paper, which I have already sent out last summer).
With respect to the credentials, I am sorry I beg to disagree. Of course, I can’t prove what I am going to say, but I feel that solutions to the RCT challenges (at least partial solutions) could come from the emerging areas of statistical learning, and complex networks. Isn’t it frustrating that RCT folks still think in terms of hypothesis testing and p-value methods, when other innovative sectors (driverless cars, genomics, NLP, …etc) have more or less shifted to learning theories?
Please feel free to contribute ideas for the workshop proposal. We still have time as the next deadline is February. Our very initial ideas is to have a 5-day workshop, and invite one person from each of the following groups:
RCT theoreticians who could talk to us, objectively, about the underlying theories of RCTs, with all of the underlying assumptions that are used to prove the corresponding theorems,
the clinical trialists who know about the practical issues and the challenges they often encounter,
the researchers who believe that RCTs are not as golden as we think (perhaps George Kepheart, Jadad from U of T Medical School, Souraya from Ryerson Nursing, …). There is a community of people who silently think that RCTs have problems.
the researchers who believe that RCTs are the reliable method for evidence extraction, and that we have no other way around it
the researchers who work on emerging methods (adaptive RCTs, multi-armed bandits, etc.).
 
Perhaps your talk, Stéphane, could be to introduce the audience to the recent developments in your areas of expertise (we could talk about which specific areas you could emphasize --- statistical learning, extreme values, networks, …). I am fine to allocate one ½ day to this talk on the third or fourth day of the workshop, after we have listened to the RCT folks on 1st and 2nd day. You and I could work out the details of your talk. For example, as you know, we have now a new institute called Vector Institute here in Toronto who focuses on AI issues. If we are going to have statistical learning specialists in the room, your talk could target your most recent publications. Of course, if the talk is highly specialized, we will lose the non-specialists and the RCT folks. Because of that, we could perhaps insert in the workshop another session before your talk to introduce the non-specialists, in a qualitative way, to the basic concepts of statistical learning. If you wish, you could that, or I could get someone else to do it.
Then, after your talk, we could articulate some modeling approaches to re-define the problem of evidence extraction as a statistical learning problem, and propose ways to make use of concentration inequalities … etc. … I don’t know … I am just thinking aloud here … But, I will be happy to interact with you on this front and bounce ideas back and forth, if you feel I might be able to add value … My PhD thesis in 2000 was actually about applying the VC theory to engineering issues. So, I do understand at the high level what statistical learning intends to do … During the 90s, when I was in Ottawa University, people were wondering why I decided to venture into statistical learning and the PAC model, but I am glad that now many communities are working in that direction.
If the workshop proposal is approved, we will cover your plane ticket, and accommodation here in Toronto for the workshop duration. I can send you more details about this, as we have some rules from the funding agencies about how to use the research funding.
Also, I noticed you copied Stéphane Gaïffas and Aurélie FISCHER on your message. Would you please suggest to have them both or one of them in this workshop? I am not sure yet about how much money we will get for this workshop, but we can try. We may succeed in having them join us at the workshop, if they can secure some partial funding from the French side. For you, I will commit to cover all your expenses within the rules of the funding agency (economy class, up to $200 per day for accommodation, no alcohol covered, etc.).
Last but not least, Karim will put together a repository of articles and other documents to share between us.
If you have any other suggestion, please don’t hesitate to e-mail me. Perhaps we could actually talk on Skype, when you are available. I did add you on Skype, but I am not sure if you got the invitation.

